---
fig-cap-location: top
---

# Run the nfcore-rnaseq pipeline on Pawsey’s Nimbus Cloud"

<div class="questions">

### Questions

- "What does the actual nfcore-rnaseq command look like?"
- "What are the main input parameters?"
- "What are the outputs?"
- "What are the output log files?"

</div>  

<div class="objectives">

### Objectives

- "Understanding and excecuting the nfcore-rnaseq command, it's inputs and outputs"
</div>  


### Running the pipeline on Pawsey-Nimbus VM

- Please go back to the command-line(Terminal) window on which you have logged on to the Nimbus training instance.
Check your path by typing:
```r
pwd
```
- You should be in the path: `/home/training/base_directory/working_directory` 
- If you are not, move into the above path by typing:
```r
cd /home/training/base_directory/working_directory
```

#### Excecuting the Nextflow nfcore-rnaseq pipeline
We will run the single nfcore-rnaseq command using a utility called __screen__ in unix.

What is the `screen` command?

- The __screen command__ in Linux provides the ability to launch and use multiple shell sessions from a single ssh session. 
- When a process is started with ‘screen’, the process can be detached from session & then can reattach the session at a later time. 
- When the session is detached, the process that was originally started from the screen is still running and managed by the screen itself. 
- The process can then re-attach the session at a later time, and the terminals are still there, the way it was left.


#### (1) Start a new screen window 
-S: It will start a new window within the screen and also gives a name to the window. 
It creates a session which is identified by that name. The name can be used to reattach screen at a later stage.

```r
screen -S run_nextflow_in_screen
```

#### (2) Run the nfcore-rnaseq command 
<font size="2.5">
```default

cvmfs_path=/cvmfs/data.biocommons.aarnet.edu.au/Final_resources_250722
  
nextflow run $cvmfs_path/nfcore_pipeline/rnaseq/ \                                    # the excecutable file
    --input samplesheet.csv \                                                         # samplesheet file-name
    -profile singularity \                                                            # profile e.g. singularity
    --fasta $cvmfs_path/Mouse_chr18_reference/chr18.fa \                              # Path: Genome fasta file
    --gtf $cvmfs_path/Mouse_chr18_reference/chr_18_startOfLine.gtf \                  # path: gtf file
    --star_index $cvmfs_path/Mouse_chr18_reference/chr18_STAR_singularity_index/ \    # path: 'STAR' index file
    --max_memory '6 GB' --max_cpus 2 \                                                # memory and cpu resources 
    --outdir results \
    -with-report excecution_report.html \                                             # Excecution log file-name 
    -with-timeline timeline_report.html                                               # Timeline log file-name

```
</font>


- The [CernVM File System](https://cernvm.cern.ch/fs/) i.e. `cvmfs` provides a scalable, reliable and low-maintenance software distribution service.
- The names of cvmfs folders (e.g. __Final_resources_250722__) and files need to be standardised (make these more user-friendly). This is __work in progress__.


#### (3) Detach from the above screen session
-d: It is used to detach a screen session so that it can be reattached in future. 
It can also be done with the help of shortcut key ```Ctrl-a + d```

#### (4) Reattach the screen-session to check the progress
-r: It is used to reattach a screen session which was detached in past.
```r
screen -r run_nextflow_in_screen
```
Repeat Steps (3) and (4) to check the the excecution status of the command.

- The nfcore-rnaseq command will take about 18-22 minutes to run to completion.
- In the mean time we will proceed to discuss some of the important log files. 
- We plan to make a `pre-processed results folder` available for download. If one of more trainees have a runtime problem, they will be able view these pre-computed results.   
- An `scp command` to transfer required files from the results folder on the VM instance to your local machine will also be made available.


<div class="keypoints">

### Key points

- Pawsey Nimbus VM is a good resource to run nfcore piplelines
- System resouces such as cpus and memory can be customised per step using config files.
- Excecution and timeline logs files provide a detailed summary of the run.

</div>  



  
